Project 5 — Generative AI Applications
Implementation of Generative Models and Responsible Innovation

What You Will Submit
generative_model.ipynb
Generative_AI_Analysis_Report.pdf
requirements.txt
Your dataset file (CSV, image set, text corpus) or clearly documented prompt or data source
Project Instructions
Task 1 — Define the Generative Task and Select Your Approach
For this project, you will define a generative AI task and implement a generative model using methods covered in your coursework. Selecting an appropriate generative approach and clearly framing the task are part of the assessment.

You must choose one of the following generative modeling approaches:

Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) for image generation
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) for image generation or representation learning
Transformer-based generation for text or sequence data
You are not required to implement diffusion models. Diffusion models may be discussed conceptually in your written report when comparing generative approaches or addressing ethical considerations.

Clearly state the goal of your generative system and what type of content it produces.

Dataset or Prompt Requirements
Your dataset or prompt source must:

Be appropriate for the chosen generative task
Be publicly available or clearly documented
Be appropriate for academic use
Not be synthetic or AI-generated as a dataset
Not be reused from any previous capstone project
Document how your data or prompt source was obtained and how it is used in your model.

Task 2 — Load and Inspect Your Data or Prompt Source
In generative_model.ipynb:

Load your dataset or define your prompt source
Display representative samples such as images, text excerpts, or sequences
Inspect data structure, formats, and sizes
Note any preprocessing considerations
This ensures you understand how inputs flow into the generative model.

Task 3 — Implement and Train a Generative Model
Using approved frameworks and methods from your coursework, implement and train your generative model.

Your notebook must include:

The full model architecture definition
A brief Markdown explanation of key design choices
Training code with appropriate loss functions and optimizers
Evidence of training progress, such as loss curves or training diagnostics
The goal is a correct and stable implementation rather than perfect outputs.

Task 4 — Generate and Evaluate Outputs
Generate sample outputs from your trained model.

Your notebook must include:

Multiple generated examples
A qualitative evaluation of output quality
Discussion of strengths and failure cases
Quantitative metrics are optional where appropriate.

Task 5 — Write a Short Notebook Summary
Add a brief Markdown section of 4 to 6 sentences summarizing:

The generative task and model used
Characteristics of generated outputs
Challenges encountered during training
Observed limitations or failure modes
This concludes your notebook.

Task 6 — Write the Generative AI Analysis Report with Academic Citations
Create Generative_AI_Analysis_Report.pdf with the following sections.

Overview
Explain the generative task, dataset, or prompt source, and model type used.

Dataset or Prompt Description
Describe the data or prompt source, its size or scope, and how it supports the generative task.

Model Design and Training Approach
Explain the model architecture, training setup, and key design decisions.

Output Evaluation and Interpretation
Discuss generated outputs, highlighting quality, variability, and limitations.

Ethical Considerations and Responsible Use
Identify at least one ethical concern related to bias, misuse, creative ownership, or societal impact.

Limitations and Future Improvements
Describe limitations of the model or data and propose realistic next steps.

Citation Requirements
Use citations when:

Defining generative modeling concepts
Justifying architectural or training decisions
Discussing ethical or responsible-use considerations
Do not cite your own code, training logs, or generated outputs.

References
List all cited sources using a consistent citation style.

Task 7 — Create requirements.txt
Generate your reproducibility file using:

pip freeze > requirements.txt
This ensures the generative AI workflow can be rerun in an identical environment.